README.md, before:

<img
  src="https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-web-assets/blob/master/readmes/terminusdb/TerminusDB-Logo-Colour_3.png"
  alt="TerminusDB Logo"
  width="50%"
  align="center"
/>

***
[![CI](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?event=push)](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb/actions/workflows/ci.yml) ![Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/terminusdb/terminusdb)

## TerminusDB is a distributed database with a collaboration model. 

It is designed to be like git, but for data. If you are reading this, **give this repo a star**. 

The building blocks of the model are:

  - Revision Control: commits for every update
  - Diff: differences between commits can be interpreted as patches between states
  - Push/Pull/Clone: communicate diffs between nodes using push / pull / clone

TerminusDB allows you to link JSON documents in a knowledge graph through a [document API](https://terminusdb.com/docs/v10.0/#/reference/reference-document-interface). TerminusDB is available as a standalone server, or you can [use online](https://dashboard.terminusdb.com/).


## Installation Guide

Install as a [Docker Container](https://terminusdb.com/docs/index/terminusdb/install/install-as-docker-container). This uses [TerminusDB Bootstrap](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-bootstrap):

### Get this repo, cd to it

```
git clone https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-bootstrap
cd terminusdb-bootstrap
```

### Run the container by using the script (the first time)

```
./terminusdb-container run

Unable to find image 'terminusdb/terminusdb-server:latest' locally
latest: Pulling from terminusdb/terminusdb-server
8f91359f1fff: Pulling fs layer
939634dec138: Pulling fs layer
f30474226dd6: Pulling fs layer
32a63113e3ae: Pulling fs layer
ae35de9092ce: Pulling fs layer
023c02983955: Pulling fs layer
d9fa4a1acf93: Pulling fs layer
[ ... ]
```

### To stop, attach, etc, see usage
```
./terminusdb-container 

USAGE:
  terminusdb-container [COMMAND]

  help        show usage
  run         run container
  stop        stop container
  attach      attach to prolog shell
  exec        execute a command inside the container
  rm          remove volumes
```

More information in the [docs](https://terminusdb.com/docs/index/terminusdb/install/install-as-docker-container), or in the [TerminusDB Bootstrap](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-bootstrap) repository. 


You can also install TerminusDB from the [Source Code](https://terminusdb.com/docs/index/terminusdb/install/install-from-source-code).


## TerminusDB CLI

A simple example creating a person with friends can be created as follows:

```shell
./terminusdb db create admin/example1
./terminusdb doc insert --graph_type=schema admin/example1 <<EOF
{ "@id" : "Person",
  "@type" : "Class",
  "name" : "xsd:string",
  "occupation" : "xsd:string",
  "friends" : { "@type" : "Set",
                "@class" : "Person" }}
EOF
./terminusdb doc insert admin/example1 --message='adding Gavin' <<EOF
{ "@type" : "Person","name" : "Gavin", "occupation" : "Coder"}
EOF
```

You can attach this to a database on TerminusX in order to distribute it by setting your remote. First you will need to create
a resource from [TerminusX](https://dashboard.terminusdb.com/). This is analogous to creating a repository on GitHub.

Log into TerminusX, create a new data product, and make sure
you have an access token to the team in which we created that data
product. Then copy the URL to clone from the data product info page.

If you make a data product called `example` in the team
`Terminators`. We could then issue the following command using the
TerminusDB CLI. You should get an API token from your profile page and replace `'XYZ'` with this token.

```shell
./terminusdb remote add admin/example1 origin 'https://cloud-dev.terminusdb.com/Terminators/example' --token='XYZ'
./terminusdb fetch admin/example1 --token='XYZ'
./terminusdb push admin/example1 --token='XYZ'
```

Once completed, you'll have a remote copy of this database.

More on the [CLI here](https://github.com/GavinMendelGleason/blog/blob/main/entries/terminusdb_cli.md)

## Community

Come visit us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/yTJKAma)
or our [forum](https://discuss.terminusdb.com). On Twitter, we're [@TerminusDB](https://twitter.com/TerminusDB).

## Documentation

Check out our documentation site for more information: [TerminusDB documentation](https://terminusdb.com/docs/) website. 
  
We are working hard to improve our docs - if you see an issue, please open an issue in the [documentation repo](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-docs). 

White paper on our [delta-encoding approach](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb/blob/dev/docs/whitepaper/terminusdb.pdf) to data mangement. 

Check the [Python Client](https://pypi.org/project/terminusdb-client/) 🐍. Or the [JavaScript Client](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-client) 🌐.

WOQL is a powerful query language which allows you to concisely express complex patterns over arbitrary data structures. What makes it so expressive and easy to use is the [radical simplicity of the core underlying concepts](https://terminusdb.com/blog/the-power-of-web-object-query-language/).

## Changes in this Version

[Release Notes](docs/RELEASE_NOTES.md)

## Copyright

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at
```
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
```

Commit message:

Readme updates (#1258)
* Remove trailing spaces

* Remove more trailing spaces

* README: Add new CLI command for terminusdb-bootstrap

* README: add snap

* README: remove ./terminusdb and use terminusdb instead

Most people that will install it will have it in their PATH
and people that compile this themselves know how to execute
local binaries.

README.md, after:

<img
  src="https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-web-assets/blob/master/readmes/terminusdb/TerminusDB-Logo-Colour_3.png"
  alt="TerminusDB Logo"
  width="50%"
  align="center"
/>

***
[![CI](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?event=push)](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb/actions/workflows/ci.yml) ![Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/terminusdb/terminusdb)

## TerminusDB is a distributed database with a collaboration model.

It is designed to be like git, but for data. If you are reading this, **give this repo a star**.

The building blocks of the model are:

  - Revision Control: commits for every update
  - Diff: differences between commits can be interpreted as patches between states
  - Push/Pull/Clone: communicate diffs between nodes using push / pull / clone

TerminusDB allows you to link JSON documents in a knowledge graph through a [document API](https://terminusdb.com/docs/v10.0/#/reference/reference-document-interface). TerminusDB is available as a standalone server, or you can [use online](https://dashboard.terminusdb.com/).


## Installation Guide

[![Get it from the Snap Store](https://snapcraft.io/static/images/badges/en/snap-store-black.svg)](https://snapcraft.io/terminusdb)

The easiest way to install TerminusDB as a developer is by using the [Snap](https://snapcraft.io/terminusdb). It does not provide a daemon and is mainly intended for developers that want to try TerminusDB. For deployments, you can install as a [Docker Container](https://terminusdb.com/docs/index/terminusdb/install/install-as-docker-container). This uses [TerminusDB Bootstrap](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-bootstrap), our Docker wrapper script that makes it easy to set up the container.


### Get this repo, cd to it

```
git clone https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-bootstrap
cd terminusdb-bootstrap
```

### Run the container by using the script (the first time)

```
./terminusdb-container run

Unable to find image 'terminusdb/terminusdb-server:latest' locally
latest: Pulling from terminusdb/terminusdb-server
8f91359f1fff: Pulling fs layer
939634dec138: Pulling fs layer
f30474226dd6: Pulling fs layer
32a63113e3ae: Pulling fs layer
ae35de9092ce: Pulling fs layer
023c02983955: Pulling fs layer
d9fa4a1acf93: Pulling fs layer
[ ... ]
```

### To stop, attach, etc, see usage
```
./terminusdb-container

USAGE:
  terminusdb-container [COMMAND]

  help        show usage
  run         run container
  cli         use the terminusdb cli
  stop        stop container
  attach      attach to prolog shell
  exec        execute a command inside the container
  rm          remove volumes
```

More information in the [docs](https://terminusdb.com/docs/index/terminusdb/install/install-as-docker-container), or in the [TerminusDB Bootstrap](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-bootstrap) repository.


You can also install TerminusDB from the [Source Code](https://terminusdb.com/docs/index/terminusdb/install/install-from-source-code).


## TerminusDB CLI

A simple example creating a person with friends can be created as follows:

```shell
terminusdb db create admin/example1
terminusdb doc insert --graph_type=schema admin/example1 <<EOF
{ "@id" : "Person",
  "@type" : "Class",
  "name" : "xsd:string",
  "occupation" : "xsd:string",
  "friends" : { "@type" : "Set",
                "@class" : "Person" }}
EOF
terminusdb doc insert admin/example1 --message='adding Gavin' <<EOF
{ "@type" : "Person","name" : "Gavin", "occupation" : "Coder"}
EOF
```

You can attach this to a database on TerminusX in order to distribute it by setting your remote. First you will need to create
a resource from [TerminusX](https://dashboard.terminusdb.com/). This is analogous to creating a repository on GitHub.

Log into TerminusX, create a new data product, and make sure
you have an access token to the team in which we created that data
product. Then copy the URL to clone from the data product info page.

If you make a data product called `example` in the team
`Terminators`. We could then issue the following command using the
TerminusDB CLI. You should get an API token from your profile page and replace `'XYZ'` with this token.

```shell
terminusdb remote add admin/example1 origin 'https://cloud-dev.terminusdb.com/Terminators/example' --token='XYZ'
terminusdb fetch admin/example1 --token='XYZ'
terminusdb push admin/example1 --token='XYZ'
```

Once completed, you'll have a remote copy of this database.

More on the [CLI here](https://github.com/GavinMendelGleason/blog/blob/main/entries/terminusdb_cli.md)

## Community

Come visit us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/yTJKAma)
or our [forum](https://discuss.terminusdb.com). On Twitter, we're [@TerminusDB](https://twitter.com/TerminusDB).

## Documentation

Check out our documentation site for more information: [TerminusDB documentation](https://terminusdb.com/docs/) website. 
  
We are working hard to improve our docs - if you see an issue, please open an issue in the [documentation repo](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-docs). 

White paper on our [delta-encoding approach](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb/blob/dev/docs/whitepaper/terminusdb.pdf) to data mangement. 

Check the [Python Client](https://pypi.org/project/terminusdb-client/) 🐍. Or the [JavaScript Client](https://github.com/terminusdb/terminusdb-client) 🌐.

WOQL is a powerful query language which allows you to concisely express complex patterns over arbitrary data structures. What makes it so expressive and easy to use is the [radical simplicity of the core underlying concepts](https://terminusdb.com/blog/the-power-of-web-object-query-language/).

## Changes in this Version

[Release Notes](docs/RELEASE_NOTES.md)

## Copyright

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at
```
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
```
